collected for Dr. Ball,
were you paid for that on a piece basis? No, about
twenty-five cents an hour. On an hourly basis? On
an hourly basis, and that was the rate of pay in
those days. What types of specimens did you
collect? Oh, I would go out and collect rhizomes. I
would collect shrubs and buds and various things
that were used for the laboratory part of his
botany classes.
This was prior to the creation of the museum
building, I think, here on campus, was it not? Oh,
yes, yes. That's long before that. So none of your
specimens ended up in the museum, I take it? No, I
would think not. They ended up in the laboratory
part of his classes and probably in the garbage or
the wastebasket after the class was over.
Okay.
What types of things did you do in the swine farm? I
fed swine, and I remember, among other things,
many other things, I would move the swine from here
to there, and all kinds of operations, repairing
of fences, repairing of feeder troughs, etc. I
remember very distinctly that when the dairy at
that time, the creamer really, was actually
dumping a lot of skim milk into the sewer line, and
it was causing Mr. Zeller, P.J. Zeller, who was in
charge of sewer disposal at that time, it was
causing him troubles at the sewer disposal plants
out here so he devised a means of precipitating the
casein out of that skim milk so it wouldn't get into
his sewage disposal area. And so we wondered if it
couldn't be used possibly as a feed for swine. So I
devised a little experiment, and we set up and
carried that experiment through. And it fed it at
two different levels. And it proved to be a very
excellent feed, as a matter of fact. And I suppose
that's my first research experiment that I ever
did. This swine herd that you were working with,
was that used in the Agricultural Experiment
Station? No, no. In those days, as you know, until
about 1947, I think, the teaching
herds were all completely independent. of the
research. And so the research swine herd was out at
what we call the F&B. It's out where the old part of
the dairy center is, just out past where the water
tank is out there. And then the swine teaching farm
was located right out here, as I say, right on the
top of this hill. The golf course. The golf course,
where the golf course is. So these swine were used
in the animal science teaching? Teaching,
strictly, yes. Well, did the students do research
with them, or in what aspect of teaching were they
used? No, they made it possible. What they did,
they took. for income for the animal husbandry
department, they collected the garbage from
Spiesel Hall. And they brought it out to the swine,
among other things. Now, they didn't do it all that
way. but they had a fairly large group of swine that
they fed this garbage to. Well, we were able to pick
out of this group, pick out the animals and match
them up that we could put on this little test for the
whey, the precipitated whey from the skim milk.
That's how. As far as I know, that was the only
experiment that was conducted of that sort. Then
did the department sell parts of the herd as they
reached proper weight? Yes, always. The income
from the sale of the herd went right back into the
department of budget, yes. Then did Animal
Husband Department have other... I take it they
had a... a dairy herd and other livestock which
they used for the same purpose? No, there was a
separate dairy department. And there was, the
dairy department had the dairy herd. But there
was, the animal husbandry department had the
swine, had beef, and the beef barn was located
right where the Herman Heath building is now,
right back of the judging pavilion. And let's see,
they had sheep and goats. And these were the
animals, I guess, that the Animal Husbandry
Department had. Sheep and Goat Center was over
where the dormitory area, these 12 dormitories
are over here. The Corps of Cadets dormitories.
Yeah, right, right. Okay, did any of this
livestock from Animal Husbandry
Was it ever served in a dining hall? I mean, did you
sell it to what would now be food services? Do you
remember?
I don't remember. I doubt if it did, because there
was no processing plant. See, it would have had to
have been processed. I see. And so it was probably
sold to, I guess I shouldn't use these names,
Armour, Swift, or Wilson or something.
Commercial. Commercial processing, yeah. So the
meat lab then is a more recent process. Yes, yes
indeed. You see, the meat lab was, I graduated from
A&M in 1931, and this building where the meats lab
is, including the meats lab, was built in 1933.
Let's see.
In 31, when you graduated then, you, I believe,
went to the University of Illinois. Right. For a
master's. I had intended, since I'd had to borrow,
and incidentally, the swine herdsman, a man by the
name of Chrysler, had loaned me, I couldn't make
the 25 cents an hour, just couldn't make my way
through college. And so he had loaned me and I owed
him a little bit of money when I graduated. And I was
going out and work for a year and pay that back
before I went to graduate college. I had
definitely planned all of my coursework. to go to
graduate college. This I knew. I was going to
graduate school. But I did this. But there
absolutely, as far as I could find, there was
absolutely no jobs. available anywhere in 1931.
So I waited and waited. I turned down. I had an
opportunity for an assistantship or two at other
institutions during the latter part of my senior,
the last semester of my senior year. I turned them
down because I thought I had to get a job and I wanted
to pay this money back before I went to graduate
college. Well, it came June and July and still no
job and so it just happened that an assistantship
at the University of Illinois became available
and the man that had accepted it became ill and
could not go on to school. And so they notified the
people here the availability of this
assistantship. And I was notified about it. And so
I immediately made application and was fortunate
enough to get the assistantship. In those days,
there weren't many assistantships. And so I was
very fortunate. And that's how I happened to go. I
had planned to go to the University of Illinois
anyhow, but it happened that this assistantship
was in genetics, and I had planned to go there to
major in nutrition. So you had to make a change of
plans. Yes, sir. Why did you choose the University
of Illinois? Majorly because one of the
professors that I liked and respected on the staff
here was a graduate of Illinois and knew the people
and told me a lot about some of the people. And I had
read about H.H. Mitchell who was fairly well known
in the field of protein nutrition. at the
University of Illinois. So again, it was a matter
of people making the choices as making the choice
to come to A&M. So you went there and you had an
assistantship in genetics. Did that require you
to major in genetics? Yes, animal genetics, but I
took as many or more courses. My major professor
was quite liberal, and I took more courses,
probably, in fact I know, more courses in
nutrition than I did in genetics, so I really ended
up with a joint major between the fields of
nutrition and genetics. Now, at this point, were
you specializing in poultry or did that come even
later? No, no. disciplines were independent of
animal commodity commitments. And I took some
courses under the Dr. Leslie Card, who was the head
of the poultry section of the animal husbandry
department at the University of Illinois. It was
all in one department there. They weren't divided
up. And I took some coursework in poultry with the
idea that my commitment in nutrition or in
genetics would require a commodity field. And so
taking the courses in poultry, it prepared me then
to go into the poultry area when I went into a
commodity grouping. After you finished your
master's, you went directly into a PhD program?
Yes. In fact, I did not take a master's degree. I
went right straight on through. I see. And
had you finished your dissertation and
everything before coming to Texas A&M? No. Again,
circumstances dictates sometimes what we do. The
man that was in charge of animal genetics at Texas
A&M accepted a job at the University of Arkansas,
effective at mid-semester, February 1st. And I
was due to graduate, get my degree in June of 1930.
This had been 1936. And so I applied and received an
appointment to the position here. So I came in
February of 1936 and taught. I taught five
courses. And I really hadn't any experience in
teaching. That was quite an experience to me to try
to develop the course outlines and teach five new
courses. for the second semester of 1936. And then
I went back to Illinois in the summer, in June of 36,
and finished my degree at the end of summer. So at
that point, coming as a brand new instructor with
five different courses, I imagine you were lucky
to keep a day ahead of the students. I doubt if I did.
I doubt if I did. I think I'd be bragging if I said I
did. Okay, and what information I had been able to
pick up, you taught genetics. Yes, yes, genetics,
and I also had two courses in human heredity with
the principles of genetics. I taught one course in
principles of genetics. I taught one course in
animal genetics. And I taught two courses in human
heredity. One to non-people who had not had
genetics. They were engineers and architecture
majors and so on. And then another one was in human
heredity to those who had had genetics. Now, was
this in the animal husbandry department? No. No,
there was a separate department of genetics in
those days, yes. At what point was that
discontinued, do you remember?
It was discontinued about 19—I
think about 1947 or 48. I think there was still a
genetics department.
When I came back from Hawaii, I was gone from A&M for
about almost two years, and I came back in the
poetry department here in 1947.
During the 36 to 45 that you were in genetics, Were
you head of the genetics department? No, no, no,
no. You were on the faculty of that department. No,
I was the professor of animal genetics. Within the
genetics department. Department, right, right.
Okay. Then, I believe in 45, you went to Hawaii.
Yes, I went to Hawaii as head of the poaching
department. Did
you choose to go there because it was a step up? No,
it was a step up, distinctly so, but I don't believe
that was the major motivating factor. The major
motivating factor was that I had never been happy.
A&M was separate. Research was in one area and
teaching was in another. And I had been in the
teaching area solely. And I wanted to do both
teaching and research. For graduate students,
you've got to have both, you see. And I wanted to
emphasize the upper levels as much as I could. And
so for that reason, I'd never been happy. And I had
agitated and talked openly. that they ought to be
combined so that we could grow graduate
student-wise at A&M, but it had never come to be.
And so when I was offered the job in Hawaii in 1945, I
accepted it and resigned, turned in my
resignation from Texas A&M University. The dean
called me in when the resignation passed the
dean's desk. He called me into his office and told
me that there'd already been enough talk. He asked
me why I was resigning. And I told him that the major
reason was I could do both teaching and research.
They were all combined in a way. And there would be
no problem. And in fact, all three of them were
together, teaching and research. And so he said,
well, there's been enough talk. that when the war
is over, there's an extremely strong probability
that the teaching and research will be combined,
and agriculture will be combined here at Texas A&M
University. And would you take a leave of absence
rather than resigning under that condition? And
so I wrote the dean and director at Hawaii and asked
him if I could do this. And he said, yes, indeed, it
would be all right for me to do it. And so then I
changed. They destroyed my resignation, and I
turned in a leave request for a year's leave
without pay to take the position. And then I had to
turn in a second year leave at the end of the first
year that I was gone. And so that was a motivating
factor, I think, to do that.
As of 1945, though, you did have a considerable
amount of graduate work in agriculture. Yes, yes.
Oh, yes. But most of the departments stopped. Not
all of them, but most of them stopped at the
master's degree because, you see, the research
was done in the experiment stations. And so a
graduate student, most of the teaching
departments could possibly afford enough
facility for a master's research program, but not
for a dissertation program. So if the student was
going to the PhD, they almost had to be adopted by a
full-time research worker in the experiment
station. There were no joint appointments then as
now, I take it. I don't know of any if there were.
There may have been a few, but there were very few,
if any. They were one or the other. So you say a PhD
almost had to be adopted by the experiment
station. So then, at that point, if someone went on
for a PhD, he would have an academic advisor in the
department, I would take it, and research advisor
in the experiment station. They just weren't many
went on that way. It would have to have been a...
That's the way it would have had to have been, yes,
indeed. Now, it's... There's one further word. I
taught in the genetics department from 1936 to 45.
I taught genetics for nine months. And then if I had
graduate students, I continued the advising of
the graduate students. But for the summer months,
I went to the experiment station and did research
for three months. Was that a fairly common
practice for the faculty in agriculture? Not very
common. Not very common. I had to write a project.
for the experiment station, and they had to
construct a building for the research to be done.
And so I think I got a little bit of favor to be able to
do it. Were you then doing poultry research in
those summers? No. My research was mostly with
rats.
Mr. Hale, Fred Hale, had been doing some work on low
vitamin A and its relation to eyelessness in
swine. And I had a strain. I was carrying on a colony
of rats in my genetics laboratory here in the
instructional area. And I had an eyeless strain of
rats. And I was anxious to know whether the
genotype that caused the eyelessness in these
rats was influenced by nutrition. And so you see
that brought a commonness of interest there, and
so it became relatively easy. to get approved from
the experiment station for a summer appointment
and to carry my work over. But to continue and
discontinue was, of course, not like being
continuous for 12 months. Yeah. So your research,
you could really concentrate on your research for
three months. Yes. Obviously, you'd have to carry
it on for the other nine months, sort of. as time was
available, I think. Right. But when you went to
Hawaii, you had both research and, well, you had
actually research, teaching, and extension all
combined. Yes, right. And so they were all in one
department, and I taught one course in poetry
science, and the rest of my time was spent on
research.
Then, after two years, or about two years in
Hawaii, you came back to Texas A&M as head of the...
As head... Now, I was offered the job to come back at
Texas A&M University as the man who had been head of
the teaching department had retired. And I was
offered to come back as head of the teaching
department, but I would not accept the position
unless I came back on a joint appointment between
research and teaching. And I was offered this
joint appointment and I came back as head of the
teaching department in September, 1st of
September. In November, the research,
extension, and teaching were all combined. And at
that time, I really asked that somebody else take
the headship. But I was asked to do it and almost was
urged to do it, and so I did assume the headship of
all three areas as of November. I guess it probably
came effective December 1. I'm not sure of the
exact timing. So at that point, people who had been
in poultry science research in the Experiment
Station came under your direction. Right, right.
And then the poultry specialists in the extension
service also came under you. Yes. So they could do
some teaching in addition to what other work they
were doing. Yes. And people who had been teaching
exclusively... were freed some teaching load to
do some amount of research. Right. Actually, the
department at that time, the extension has not
changed very much. There were four specialists.
There are four specialists here, local
specialists, resident specialists, and one
field spaceless at the present time. So the
extension area has not changed. As a matter of
fact, there's reason for that because there was
tremendous numbers of flocks and the extension
was needed. Perhaps the spaceless were needed in
those days as much as today where there's much more
poultry in the state. But they're in large units,
much fewer people carrying on the poke industry of
the state, although it's many times the size it was
then. And so there has been little or no change
there. But the staff, there had to be a staff built
for teaching and research. And so it increased
from a total of 2,000. it increased a total of five
to a total of thirteen in about a three-year
period. What is the poultry science department
now teaching and research? There's one less
position than there was two years ago. There was
one position that was dropped. That's all I know as
far as I know. So did it remain at 13 or from, say you
said it rose from 5 to 13 within three years. This
would be, say, like 46 to 49. Right. Did it remain at
the level of 13 quite steadily throughout? Yes,
yes. There was no positions dropped. or none
added. Yes, I take it back. There was one position.
I better revise that because I was counting today.
There was twelve. It rose to twelve. There was one
added in nineteen and forty, let's see, nineteen,
is that it? Yeah, about 1971, I think. There was a
new environmental control position added. in
1971. So
it did increase by one position. What about the
course offerings within the Department of
Poultry Husbandry, now Poultry Science? Was that
expanded considerably between, say, 46 and 72?
Yes, it was expanded in two ways. The courses in
poultry genetics and the course in poultry
nutrition and the course in poultry management
were all offered by the same man,
or taught by the same man. in 1945, really. And now,
of course, each one of those is offered by one or two
independent people. And there's been other
courses added, and these courses that were added
have been added only to be taught by individuals
who were trained in that specialized area. So
there's been a change in terms of numbers of
courses, and there's been a change in the
background of training of the man in charge of the
course himself.